well it's time for painting the hall of
the Flying Cloud the basic color is
gonna be flat black and I'll explain in
a minute how I come across a really
excellent quality flat black for you
some models such as this let's take a
quick look around the ship before I
obscure all the woodwork my painting I
thought this might be interesting to
take one glass look at all the woodwork
on the Flying Cloud before it's obscured
by the hull paint there's gonna be black
colored hull paint and then the copper
plates in the lower part of the hull
both of which will obscure all of the
wood work that's been done so I'm gonna
put this on close up and let's take a
close and look at some of the various
different kinds of wood strakes that are
used to complete the hull of the Flying
Cloud now in close-up mode we can see
not only the regular wood planks this is
a outer layer the second layer of wood
planking that's been incomplete but also
there are a few almost it's like a third
layer of planking that's put on in some
places in this case it's to reinforce
the chain plates that are going to be
nailed to the hull so there's these
three extra strips right here three
extra strakes of wood and then there's a
larger there's two larger ones that are
bumpers actually support the side of the
hull and anything that's nailed to it
such as the chain plates so we can
clearly see those in place as well
here's where the bowsprit will be coming
out see the hawser is the hawser folds
for the anchor chain and we can also see
the channels are in place for the chain
plates very important though is not to
paint too much because I don't want to
obscure all of the wood grain and the
spaces between the wood planks as you
can see before they're painted right now
one of the first tips and one of the
most important things to do before you
start painting your wooden ship model is
to clear up all the dust now you can use
brushes and you can use blowers but the
only thing that really moved that I
found it works really really great is a
cheesecloth or tacking cloth so I always
start off a project with a new piece of
cheesecloth tacking cloth now this super
super sticky paper the cloth will pick
up any of the dust and debris that you
don't want on the model you don't want
it trapped by the paint so give it a
really good thorough going-over with
some kind of cheesecloth or tacky cloth
before you start any paint now that'll
reject your model prepared by cleaning
it off as a cheesecloth or some kind of
tacking cloth next thing is to get the
paint ready well it's taking me a few
years to refine the perfect flat black
paint for ship models but I think I
finally found the formula here's what I
do is I've got a pint of latex flat
black and then to that I added simple
chalk I actually took some white chalk
and ground it up so that I had just the
champagne of chalk filings and added
that and then I also added some flat
white now that combination in this latex
paint it's amazing it actually looks a
little milky white when you look at it
I'll give a close-up look here now I
don't know how well the camera is
picking this up but if you can see this
you'll see that this is not just real
black it's awful it's black with a
little tight tinge of white in it it
almost looks great when you've mixed in
the chalk
and then a little bit of flat white
paint but when this dries it's
incredibly flat the flat is black that
I've ever found it looks perfect for
replicating a ship model that's been at
sea for a while now I'm mixing the paint
in proportions of two-thirds paint
one-third water and of course tested on
a little flat on a little piece of
scratch wood or paper and make sure that
it's gonna a little flat a little now
here's a really good tip that I suggest
you follow anytime you're gonna paint
something I learned this from the Sonoma
County woodworkers Association and I
want to thank you guys for the tip any
time did you go to paint something make
sure that the paint and the item that
you're painting have been sitting in the
same room for 24 hours before you start
painting that way the temperature of
both items will be exactly the same and
it's amazing how much quicker paint will
adhere to something when it's exactly
the same temperature as the item that's
being painted you know I used to keep
Kansas spray paint on in the garage and
I'd run and grab one shake it up spray
something and I couldn't figure out why
I'm always putting on two or three coats
of paint
well that Kansas great paint was about
10 degrees cooler than the item I was
painting because it was kept in the
garage
as soon as I started making sure that
both items are exactly the same
temperature before painting it's
astounding the results that you're going
to get so i really suggest that as a tip
anytime you're gonna either spray paint
with a an airbrush words you're gonna
paint with a can of spray paint make
sure that both the items are in the same
room for 24 hours i know it's a real
paint but 24 hours before you start
painting and it's something amazing the
results you get alright it's time to
start painting let's get busy